Journal of Experimental Psychology: General
1982, Vol. l l U N o . 2, 208-227

Copyright 1982 by the American Psychological Association, Inc.
0096-3445/82/1102-0208S00.75

Visual Search and Reading of Rapid Serial
Presentations of Letter Strings, Words, and Text
James F. Juola, Nicklas J. Ward, and Timothy McNamara
University of Kansas
SUMMARY
Text is usually read by executing a series of eye movements resulting in a sequence
of visual inputs to the reader that contain useful information about the word or small
group of words fixated. This process can be simulated by a computer program that
samples and displays successive segments of text for brief time intervals to a single
visual locus. In this case the text can be read without necessitating any eye movements
on the part of the reader. The present studies test perceptibility and readability of
letter strings, words, and running text presented as sequences of rapid serial visual
presentations (RSVPs) via a computer display.
Experiments 1 and 2 showed that college-student subjects could rapidly and accurately detect the presence or absence of a target letter in single letter strings and in
RSVPs of five successive strings presented at rates of 100, 200, or 300 msec per string.
Both experiments, which used computer displays, replicated results that have been
found in studies using high-quality printed displays presented in tachistoscopes. Experiment 3 demonstrated that subjects could search for exemplars of a semantic category more accurately than they could search for single target letters given RSVPs
of nine successive words. Further, accuracy was greater in both cases when the sequences formed normal sentences than when they were scrambled versions of those
sentences. The advantage for grammatical word sequences persisted even at presentation rates of 50 msec per word (equivalent to 1,200 words per min.).
Experiment 4 compared comprehension performance for material read in a normal
paragraph format versus RSVP sequences. Over a range of reading difficulties and
presentation rates, comprehension was generally equivalent in the two modes of presentation. The results indicated that text can be read at rapid rates and with good
comprehension when it is presented as a sequence of brief presentations of single words
or small groups of words. The RSVP method of text presentation is a promising technique both for the study of reading processes and for the search for ways to speed
understanding of textual information.
A person reading a text executes a series the text), we can account for the typical
of eye fixations spaced between voluntary adult reading speed of about 300 words per
eye movements called saccades. Studies of minute (WPM) for nonchallenging texts
eye movements and fixation durations in such as newspaper and magazine stories,
reading have shown them to be highly variPsychologists studying information proable, but averages for skilled readers are cessing have seized on these facts about eye
about 200 to 250 msec per fixation and about fixations and saccades and, with increasingly
20 to 50 msec per saccade (Haber, 1976;
sophisticated monitoring equipment, have
Huey, 1908/1968; Levy-Schoen & O'Regan, developed theories of the reading process
1979; Shebilske, 1975). The saccades tra- linking external eye movement patterns to
verse about 10 letter spaces on the average, internal processes of comprehension (e.g.,
so that about every one to two words in a Just & Carpenter, 1980; Rayner & Mctext are centrally fixated. Adding in the fact Conkie, 1977). It is generally agreed that
that some 10%-20% of fixations are regres- reading is a dynamic, constructive process
sive (i.e., they return to an earlier part of in which the reader's linguistic and world
208

VISUAL SEARCH AND READING

knowledge greatly complement the static
text in helping the reader to arrive at some
understanding of the author's intended
meaning. Comprehension processes thus involve both encoding the fixated word or small
group of words around the central point of
regard and integrating their meaning into
a developing coherent structure. Some of
these processes are undoubtedly executed
"on-line" in the sense that unusual words or
words not highly predictable from context
require additional processing time, and this
time is reflected to some extent in the fixation duration. Other comprehension processes are more global, however, and the
length of fixation might not reflect the processing of current input so much as time for
tying the current or previous phrase's meaning into a coherent relationship with the
topic or text macrostructure.
One might ask how important systematic
variations in fixation durations are for normal . comprehension processes. That is, is
reading for comprehension disrupted when
control over viewing times is taken away
from the subject and determined by some
display device? The research reported here
asks this and other questions by substituting
a dynamically changing text display and a
static visual process for the normal operations in reading. Forster (1970) studied the
readability of sentences presented one word
at a time, in a rapid sequence to a single
visual location. This was done by photoThis research was supported by a grant from the
General Research Fund of the University of Kansas and
by National Institute of Education Grants G-77-0010
and G-78-0179. However, the opinions expressed herein
do not necessarily reflect the position or policy of the
National Institute of Education, and no official endorsement by the National Institute of Education should be
inferred.
The authors acknowledge the assistance of Wade
Welch in all of the research reported here and the assistance of Hsuan-Chih Chen and Cindy Ikenaga in
Experiment 4. Thanks are also due to Frances Friedrich
for comments on an earlier version of this manuscript.
Some of this research was reported at the 1979 meeting
of the Midwestern Psychological Association in Chicago, at the 1979 meeting of the Psychonomic Society
in Phoenix, and at the 1980 National Reading Conference in San Diego.
Timothy McNamara is now at Yale University.
Requests for reprints should be sent to James F. Juola,
Department of Psychology, Fraser Hall, University of
Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas 66045.

209

graphing single words in successive frames
of a motion picture film and then projecting
it at normal speed. He found that undergraduate students could correctly report
about four out of six words in a sentence
when they were presented at a rate of 62.5
msec per word (equivalent to 960 WPM).
Other studies using similar procedures have
indicated that adults can read text presented
one word or several words at a time at rates
approximating those obtained when reading
text normally (Aaronson & Scarborough,
1977; Bouma & de Voogd, 1974; Potter,
Kroll, & Harris, 1980).
One goal of the present investigation is to
extend Forster's rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP) technique to the study of
reading for comprehension. Studies of reading using RSVP methods have usually employed mechanical devices such as filmstrips
(Potter et al, 1980) or advancing rolls of
paper visible through a narrow slit (Bouma
& de Voogd, 1974). Those making use of
computer displays have typically shown text
one word at a time, sometimes under control
of the subject (e.g., Aaronson & Scarborough, 1977). The computer-controlled display offers a great deal of flexibility in text
presentation and thus a new means of studying reading from the input point of view. As
a starting point, it is possible to simulate the
visual process of reading; that is, a text can
be broken up into short units of about 10
characters and spaces that are clearly identifiable during a brief presentation to foveal
vision. Successive segments of text can then
be continuously presented to a common visual locus at about 250-msec intervals. This
sequence of displays mimics the visual input
of normal reading, although without the typical variation due to the placement and duration of a reader's eye fixations. Further,
parametric manipulations of the amount of
text visible at any one time as well as the
length of time that each segment is presented
can be used to explore presentation conditions that enhance or reduce text readability.
The study of text readability when it is
presented as a sequence of words and phrases
to a single locus is important for at least
three reasons. First, a growing percentage
of texts that people read will be presented
on television screens or on other electroni-

210

J. F. JUOLA, N. J. WARD, AND T. McNAMARA

cally controlled display devices in schools,
homes, and various employment environments. It is important to discover ways of
making computer-displayed text easily readable and understandable. It is of additional
interest to optimize the presentation mode
to enable maximal transfer between the data
bank or other source of information and the
reader viewing the system.
Second, it is not obvious that the best way
to read for comprehension is to sit before a
static text and initiate a series of eye movements and fixations. Although fixations tend
to be correlated in a reasonable way with
information value in text—that is, long, infrequent, and important words tend to be
fixated with a higher probability and for a
longer time than function words and highly
redundant words (Just & Carpenter, 1980)—
it is not certain that one's eye-fixation patterns are the most efficient way of sampling
textual information. Inefficiencies could exist due to an imperfect correspondence between comprehension and perceptual processes, to errors in guidance of eye movements
(especially in regressions or in moving to the
beginning of a new line of type), or even to
the existence of saccadic suppression that is
known to reduce visual sensitivity before,
during, and after each saccadic movement
(Volkmann, 1976). It is therefore at least
theoretically possible that a computer program could be designed to select and present
text segments in a way that maximizes the
informativeness of the visual input and actually improves reading speed and comprehension relative to normal reading based on
conventional eye movements.
Finally, the method allows for new ways
to test text readability and theories of comprehension due to the unique control that is
possible over the way text is presented to the
reader.
The present set of experiments begins with
an investigation of the perceptual properties
of letter strings presented on a cathode ray
tube (CRT) display. Our initial concern was
to ensure that display format and quality
were sufficient to reproduce perceptual phenomena such as word-superiority effects that
we have obtained using high-contrast black
lowercase letters on a white background in
tachistoscopic experiments (e.g., Juola,
Leavitt, & Choe, 1974). A second study was

designed to investigate similar phenomena
using a letter-search task for single targets
in a rapid sequence of several letter strings.
Experiment 3 also used the RSVP task and
included comparisons of performance obtained when viewing strings of unrelated
words versus normal English sentences. Finally, Experiment 4 reports an investigation
of reading texts for comprehension that are
presented either as intact paragraphs or as
series of briefly presented single words or
small groups of words for the same total
reading time.
Experiment 1
The first experiment made use of a lettersearch task and single visual displays of
common words, orthographically regular
and pronounceable psuedowords, or irregular and unpronounceable nonwords. Since
Reicher's (1969) demonstration of word-superiority effects in visual perception, many
investigators have shown that words and regular pseudowords are more perceptible than
irregular nonwords. The tasks reliably showing this phenomenon include same-different
comparisons for pairs of strings (e.g., Bruder, 1978; Taylor, Miller, & Juola, 1977),
letter search through single letter strings
(e.g., Massaro, Venezky, & Taylor, 1979;
McNamara, Ward, & Juola, 1978), letter
search through lists of letter strings (e.g.,
Krueger, 1970; Krueger & Shapiro, 1979),
as well as Reicher's probe recognition technique (e.g., Baron & Thurston, 1973).
For the present study, we chose to use the
letter-search task through single displays of
horizontal letter strings, since this task has
been most recently used in our laboratory
to demonstrate word-superiority effects in
visual perception (Gilford & Juola, 1976;
Juola, Schadler, Chabot, & McCaughey,
1978; McCaughey, Juola, Schadler, & Ward,
1980). Thus, we would be in a good position
to judge whether or not results using typed
words appearing in a tachistpscope generalize to the light-against-dack, dot-matrix
characters formed on the CRT screen.
A second issue investigated in Experiment
1 is whether there is evidence for a perceptual difference between regularly spelled
pseudowords and common words. This issue
is important for contrasting theories of word

VISUAL SEARCH AND READING

perception. Some theorists assert that word
perception is based on letter perception plus
use of the redundancies of English orthography to facilitate recognition processes in
similar ways for words and other orthographically regular strings (e.g, Massaro,
1975; Massaro et al., 1979). This view predicts equivalent perceptual effects for words
and regular pseudowords. Others assert that
highly familiar words are special in the sense
that they can be processed as higher order
units or as "wholes" in a way that makes
them uniquely different from regular psuedowords (e.g., Henderson, 1980; Juola et al.,
1974; Taylor et al., 1977). For Experiment
1 we constructed a set of pseudowords that
obey the structural definitions of English
orthography, and performance on these items
was compared with that for common words
and for irregular nonwords.
Method
Subjects. Twelve native English-speaking undergraduates participated for research credit in an introductory psychology class at the University of Kansas.
They reported normal or corrected-to-normal vision and
were naive with respect to viewing tachistoscopic displays. Four additional subjects, including the three authors of the present article, also participated; they were
experienced with tachistoscopic viewing and had participated in other, similar studies.
Stimuli. The stimuli were 120 common words (mean
frequency of about 260 occurrences per million words,
Kucera & Francis, 1967), 30 each of lengths 3, 4, 5,
and 6 letters. None of the words had any repeated letters. Each word was permuted into an orthographically
regular and pronounceable pseudoword and into an irregular, unpronounceable nonword; 16% of the psuedowords and nonwords had been changed by a single
letter from their parent words in order to make acceptable anagrams. The acceptability of the pseudowords was determined by subjective judgments of each
item's pronounceability and by determining that each
included only permissible letter clusters, including the
special constraints on those at the beginnings and ends
of strings. Finally, each digraph in each successive serial
position was compared with tables of digraph frequencies provided by Mayzner and Tresselt (1965) and by
Massaro, Taylor, Venezky, Jastrzembski, and Lucas
(1980). These data confirmed that the pseudowords chosen were actually slightly more regular in terms of
summed spatial digraph frequencies than the words, and
that both types of regular items differed by an order of
magnitude from the nonwords in orthographic regularity. The complete list of 360 stimuli is provided in Table
1, and the details of the orthographic structure analysis
are presented in Table 2.
The stimuli were divided into two balanced blocks of
180 items each, and a third block was made up of 90
items from each of the first two blocks. Within each

211

block, the items were randomly ordered and then randomly selected to be used on positive and negative trials.
Those selected for positive trials had a target letter chosen randomly from one of the positions in the string.
For negative items, a target letter was selected from a
set of letters balanced in frequency with those occurring
in all strings, with the constraint that the target letter
not occur in the display. This entire process was done
five times to yield five different three-block sequences
that were used in separate experimental sessions.
Apparatus. All experiments were run using a PDF
11 /03 minicomputer with a real-time clock. The stimuli
were presented on a Teleray CRT terminal interfaced
with the computer. The targets and display strings were
composed of illuminated white dots against a dark background with a potential 5 X 9 dot matrix available for
each letter space. Actual letters used a maximum S X
7 matrix for ascenders and descenders and a S X 5 space
for "small" letters such as a or n. A nonilluminated 2 X
9 column of dots separated adjacent letters within a
string, and the dots were illuminated with a fast-decay
P31 phosphor. The words measured 1.2-1.7 cm in
length, and from a line-of-sight viewing distance of
about .7 m, a six-letter word subtended a horizontal
visual angle of 1.5°.
Procedure. The 12 unpracticed subjects were run
individually in single 1-hr, sessions. After instructions,
they were given 12 practice trials using materials similar
to the experimental stimuli. These were followed by
three blocks of 180 trials each, separated by short rest
periods. The four practiced subjects were run through
all 15 trial blocks distributed over several days. The
sequence of events on both practice and experimental
trials was the same. A trial began with the presentation
of a single lowercase target letter centered on the display
screen for 1.0 sec. The target letter was followed by a
masking field of eight overlapped uppercase Xs and Os
for 500 msec. The mask extended one character space
to the left and one character space to the right of the
largest display used. The mask was replaced by the stimulus display, presented in the center of the screen for
250 msec, after which the mask reappeared.
All subjects were asked to indicate whether or not the
display contained the target letter and to respond as
rapidly and as accurately as possible. Responses were
made by depressing one of two paddle switches with
either hand. The assignment of positive (target present)
and negative (target absent) responses to right and left
hand switches was counterbalanced across subjects.
Response latencies were measured to the nearest millisecond from stimulus display onset to the initial depression of the switch. No feedback was provided for correct
responses; the mask remained on for 1.75 msec after the
response until the next target letter was presented. Immediately after each incorrect response the word ERROR
appeared in the center of the screen and remained on
for 2.0 sec, followed by the mask for 1.75 sec, and then
the next target letter.

Results
Mean response times (RTs) for correct
responses were computed for each cell of the
design for each subject. Outlying RTs were
defined as those exceeding twice their cell

212

J. F. JUOLA, N. J. WARD, AND T. McNAMARA

means and were eliminated from the data
(approximately .5% of the data were so eliminated).
The mean RT data were analyzed using

an ANOVA (analysis of variance) with the
between-subjects variable of subject group
(practiced vs. unpracticed) and the three
within-subjects variables of display type

Table 1
Stimuli Used in Experiments I and 2
Three letters

Six letters

Five letters

Four letters
Words

air
big
boy
cut
few
gun
hot
job
led
men
old
red
sat
son
top

act
ask
bit
car
far
gas
hit _
how
key
low
nor
put
run
sea
sun

born
come
game
gone
hour
king
left
near
rate
rise
role
sort
take
true
west

best
both
fear
girl
head
just
lead
line
pain
rest
road
shot
step
town
turn

break
claim
earth
field
great
horse
large
night
quite
shown
sound
speak
think
those
young

board
chief
clear
faith
forms
heard
house
month
plant
short
sight
south
stage
third
trade

almost
behind
course
enough
formed
ground
island
modern
number
reason
second
spring
strong
turned
worked

action
around
change
during,
figure
friend
growth
itself
months
public
result
showed
square
toward
walked

bourd
chiet
crale
thaif
froms
heark
bouse
nomth
giant
trosh
douns
pakes
thonk
hotes
yourg

stalom
hinbed
scoure
honuge
morfed
droung
dalins
morned
nomths
sonare
corides
prings
storng
treund
rowked

tacion
unroad
haceng
ruding
furige
refind
worgth
fiselt
bernurh
plubic
suiter
whosed
quares
wotard
klawed

Pseudowords

ain
hig
yob
cet
faw
nog
ton
jok
lod
nem
aid
rud
tas
sou
wot

cay
bas

rwa
ibg
ymb
etu
wfe
ugn
hto
bjo
Ide
emn
Ido
rde
tsa
nso
pto

tea
ksa
ibt
rco
rfa
sga
hti

tid
cer
fer
gos
hib
horn

koy
lor
n$r

tep

nur
ase
nos

best
thob
fean
glar
bode
hour
gink
telf
rane
real
sier
soth
stap
toun
nurt

mest
bron
moce
mage
goen
loer
pust
lade
lein
naip
ster
doar
sart
tade
ture

obnr
rfae
Tlig
hdea
ohru
ngki
flel
nrea
rtea
rsie
htos
tpes
nwot
ntru
wtes

tbes
btoh
mcoe
gmea
ngeo
htea
jtus
dlea
Inei
aipn
rtes
rdoa
otsr
tkea
uetr

breat
maich
thare
feald
trage
harse
grate
ginth
quate
sught
nbuth
geast
dirth
drate
whons

1

;

Non words

ohw
eks
wlo
nro
ptu
nru
csa
nsu

krbea
Icmia
htrae
tfiah
sfmor
rdhea
hseou
tnomh
tpaln
rsoht
htigs
gsaet
hdtir
aedtr
htsuo

rbdoa
cfeih
Iraec
ngyou
dleif
rtaeg
hrsoe
rgael
tgihn
qteiu
nwohs
dsuon
ksaep
tknih
htsoe

edbnih
rcueos
uhngoe
emrdof
dgnruo
adlnsi
dnemro
rbuenm
nrsoea
ocnsde
pngris
tsogrn
eurdtn
ekdwla
oaitcn

:

:

ndruao
gcneha
uigdrn
ieugrf
efdnri
rtgohn
etflsi
honstm
Ipiucb
rtlseu
odwhse
aueqsr
otdrwa
edrwko
mtsaol

213

VISUAL SEARCH AND READING

Table 2
Mean Summed Spatial Digraph Frequencies of the Stimuli Listed in Table I , Based on Statistics
Provided by Mayzner and Tresselt (1965) and Massaro, Taylor, and Venezky (1980)
Three letters

Four letters

Display type

MT

M

MT

Words
Pseudowords
Nonwords

55
66
0

1525
1883
1

68
73

5

M

1865 .
2034
162

Five letters

Six letters

MT

M

MT

M

67
64
6

2022
1982
229

46
43
3

1470
1433
114

Note. MT = Mayzer and Tresselt; M = Massaro et al.

(word, pseudoword, or nonword), display
length (3, 4, 5, or 6 letters), and response
type (positive vs. negative). All four factors
had significant effects. Practiced subjects
responded more rapidly than unpracticed
subjects, F(l, 14) = 16.5, p < .001; positive
responses were faster than negative responses, F(l, 14) = 24.3, p < .001; response
times increased with number of display letters, F(3, 42) = 43.9, p < .001; and response
times differed for words, pseudowords, and
nonwords, F(2, 28) = 13.5, /x.OOl. The
only significant interaction was that between
subject group and display length, F(l, 42) =
3.5, p < .05. When the data for practiced

and unpracticed subjects were examined separately, it was found that besides being
faster overall, RT increased more slowly
with number of display letters for practiced
subjects than for unpracticed subjects. Leastsquares linear fits to the RT by display
length functions resulted in slopes of 18
msec/letter for the practiced group and 31
msec/letter for the unpracticed group. These
data, along with display-type and displaylength effects are shown in Figure 1.
The data for the first experiment are summarized in Table 3, which combines the results for the four practiced and 12 unpracticed subjects. The mean RT averaged across

0—0 NEGATIVE RESPONSES
•—« POSITIVE RESPONSES

NONWORDS
PSEUDOWORDS
WORDS

900
850
800
750
700
650
600
550
500
450
400

NUMBER OF DISPLAY LETTERS

Figure I, Mean response times in Experiment 1, plotted against number of display letters. (In both
panels, the data in the lower half of the figure are for the four practiced subjects, and the data in the
upper half are for the 12 unpracticed subjects.)

214

J. F. JUOLA, N. J. WARD, AND T. McNAMARA

Table 3
Response Times and Proportions of Errors (in Parentheses) for Each Cell of the Design in
Experiment I
Three letters
Display type

P

N

Five letters

Four letters

M

N

M

N

Six letters

M

N

Words

633
706
669
641
706
674
655
722
689
699
752
(.019) (.019) (.019) (.025) (.028) (.027) (.016) (.019) (.018) (.030) (.028)

726
(.029)

Pseudowords

626
703
665
647
719
683
708
(.016) (.025) (.021) (.032) (.013) (.023) (.034)

724
716
713
771
(.021) (.027) (.045) (.036)

742
(.041)

Nonwords

645
690
667
672
708
690
685
772
729
753
815
(.024) (.015) (.020) (.028) (.016) (.022) (.049) (.016) (.032) (.080) (.071)

784
(.075)

Note. Data are for practiced and unpracticed subjects combined. Response times are given in milliseconds. P =
positive trial; N = negative trial.

all string lengths was 689 msec for words, Discussion
which was significantly less than the 701
msec mean RT for pseudowords, ?(381) =
The results demonstrated that subjects
3.0, p < .01. The pseudowords were in turn could rapidly and accurately detect the presresponded to more rapidly than the non- ence or absence of a target letter in a string
words (mean RT = 718 msec), *(381) = and that word-superiority effects were found
4.25, p < .01.
in both the RT and error data. Thus, we
Separate analyses were performed on the replicated earlier findings that had resulted
RT data from positive trials only, with the from similar procedures and high-quality,
serial position of the target letter added as typed stimuli exposed in a; tachistoscope
a variable to the previous ANOVA design. (e.g., Juola et al., 1978; McCaughey et al,
Significant or marginally significant serial- 1980). We had anticipated these results but
position effects were found for four-, five-, considered it necessary to demonstrate them
and six-letter items: F(3,42) = 5.3, p < .01; before proceeding to a study of text readF(4, 56) = 2.8, p < .08; F(5, 70) = 5.2, p < ability using the dot-matrix character font
.001, respectively. Significant main effects of the CRT; it has been shown that even
were found for the same variables as in the such apparently innocuous distortions as enoverall analysis, and there were no signifi- largements of printed words to slightly
cant interactions involving serial position greater than normal reading size can affect
and any other factors. The serial position perceptual processes (e.g., Purcell, Stanovdata are presented in Table 4.
ich, & Spector, 1978).
The differences in performance that we
A final analysis was made of the error
data. The percentage of errors for each sub- observed for words and pseudowords were
ject and each cell of the design were cal- consistently small but reliable across several
culated and converted to arc sines before the studies, being 12 msec in the RT data and
ANOVA. Error rates increased with display .5% in the error data for the present experlength, F(3, 42) = 10.0, p < .01, and were iment. In turn, pseudowords produced a 17smallest for words and largest for nonwords, msec RT advantage and a .9% accuracy adF(2, 28) = 4.6, p < .02. Multiple compari- vantage over the nonwords. Since both the
sons revealed that the 2.3% error rate for RT and error data demonstrated the same
words did not differ significantly from the trends, the word advantage cannot be at2.8% rate for pseudowords, *(381) = .75. tributed to speed-accuracy trade-offs. We
However, the 3.7% error rate for nonwords conclude that the general advantage in perwas significantly greater than that for pseu- ceptual processing for words over pseudodowords, *(381) = 2.74, p < .01. No other words is due to some property of words that
main effects or interactions were significant. is not captured by the orthographic regular-

VISUAL SEARCH AND READING

ity of the pseudowords. Common words have
been experienced as wholistic visual objects
thousands of times by college students and
appear to have the capacity to be processed
differently from pseudowords. The nature of
this processing difference is not revealed by
our data, but a consistent explanation would
be that word perception can proceed directly
from detection of letter features, and perhaps features of the overall shape of the
item, to identification of the entire word.
Pseudowords, and possibly words on some
occasions, are processed by an indirect
method—perhaps from letter and shape features to identification of individual letters or
letter clusters. Knowledge of orthography
and spelling patterns in English presumably
facilitates this recognition process and results in an advantage for regular pseudowords over irregular nonwords.
Display length and display type did not
interact significantly. This result is consistent with localizing word and pseudoword
advantages over nonwords at an early, encoding stage of processing rather than at a
later, comparison stage involving the target
and display letters. If display type influenced
comparison processes in visual search, we
would expect an interaction between display
length and display type (Sternberg, 1966,
1969; see also Gilford & Juola, 1976).

215

the Teleray CRT was sufficient to generate
accurate rapid letter-search performance
through a single brief exposure of a letter
string. In all important ways the results were
comparable to those obtained using highquality stimuli exposed in a tachistoscope.
We could thus proceed with reasonable confidence to studies of reading computer-presented text under the assumption that there
were no serious perceptual problems with the
CRT display and the character font used.
A second experiment was designed to further
test perceptual properties of the display in
a task approaching the RSVP method of text
presentation. The same task and materials
were used as in Experiment 1, but the displays consisted of series of five words, pseudowords, or nonwords successively presented
to a common visual locus. The aim was to
test the limits of search performance, and
therefore the perceptibility of the displays,
in RSVP conditions.
Method
Subjects. Sixteen native English-speaking undergraduates participated for research credit in an introductory psychology class at the University of Kansas.
The four practiced subjects from Experiment 1 also
participated.
Stimuli and apparatus. The words, pseudowords,
nonwords, target letters, and masking field were the
same as those used in Experiment 1. The display items
were arranged into IS blocks of 72 sets each. Each set
contained five items that were to be displayed successively. The five items in each set were all words, pseudowords, or nonwords, and all had the same number of
letters. Thus there were 12 different kinds of sets cor-

Experiment 2
The first study demonstrated that the visual quality of the characters presented on

Table 4
Mean Response Times and Mean Proportions of Errors (in Parentheses) for All Serial Positions
at Each Display Length in Experiment I
Serial position
Display
length

1

2

3

4

5

3

626
(.021)

641
(.014)

638
(.018)

4

618
(.031)

639
(.015)

666
(.030)

689
(.052)

5

651
(.029)

699
(.029)

664
(.018)

711
(.013)

717
(.062)

6

663
(.035)

700
(.054)

717
(.055)

737
(.042)

773
(.056)

Note. Data are combined for all three display types. Response times are given in milliseconds.

6

785
(.093)

216

J. F. JUOLA, N. J. WARD, AND T. McNAMARA

Table 5
Mean Response Times and Proportions of Errors (in Parentheses) for Words, Psuedowards, and
Nonwords at the Three Exposure Durations in Experiment 2
Positive trials
Exposure duration
per item

Words

Pseudowords

100

719
(.19)

731
(.22)

200

711
(.10)

707
(.09)

300

753
(.07)

M

728
(-12)

Negative trials
Nonwords

Words

Pseudowords

Nonwords

730
(.18)

668
(.18)

674
(.19)

741
(.12)

752
(.08)

729
(.12)

709
(.12)

751
(.06)

761
(.09)

805
(.03)

796
(.06)

798
(.07)

730
(.12)

751
(.17)

762
(.10)

731
(.12)

727
(.13)

.

- 752
(.29)

/

Note. Response times and exposure durations are given in milliseconds.
responding to the combination of three display types
and four display sizes. In forming the sets, care was
taken to ensure that no two consecutive items had the
same letter in any corresponding serial position.
Within each 72-set block, half of the sets in each
condition were randomly selected for positive trials and
half were selected for negative trials. For positive trials,
target letters were randomly chosen from one of the
positions in the second, third, or fourth item, with the
constraint that the target occur exactly once in the' set.
The target did not occur anywhere in the set on negative
trials. Negative target letters were selected to approximate the overall relative frequency of occurrence of the
letters in the stimulus set.
The apparatus and display conditions were the same
as those used in Experiment 1.
Procedure. The 16 unpracticed subjects were run
in single 1-hr, sessions using different combinations of
six of the fifteen 72-set blocks, plus 12 practice trials.
The four practiced subjects were run through all 15 trial
blocks, distributed over several days. On each trial, the
target letter was presented in the center of the display
for 1.0 sec and was followed by a masking field of overlapped Xs and Os for .5 sec. The mask was followed by
the sequential presentation of the five items in the set,
all appearing in the center of the window, followed by
the reappearance of the mask. Three presentation rates
were used, and these were crossed in a random order
with all other factors in the design. The five items in a
set were presented for either 100,200, or 300 msec each.
All subjects were instructed to indicate whether the
target occurred anywhere in the stimulus set (positive
response) or nowhere in the set (negative response) and
to make their responses as rapidly and accurately as
possible. As in Experiment 1, responses were made by
pressing one of two paddle switches, and RTs were
measured from the onset of the last item in the set on
negative trials and from the onset of the string containing the target on positive trials. Following each correct
response, the mask remained on for 1.25 sec before the
next target letter appeared. If an incorrect response was
made, the word ERROR appeared for 1.5 sec followed
by the mask for 1.25 sec and then the next target letter.

Results
The mean RTs for correct responses for
each subject and cell of the design were obtained in the same manner as in Experiment
1. An overall ANOVA included the factors of
subject group (practiced vs. unpracticed),
display type (words, pseudowords, or nonwords), display length (3, 4, 5, or 6 letters),
exposure duration (100, 200, or 300 msec
per letter string), and response type (positive
vs. negative). The group effect was highly
significant; mean RT for practiced subjects
was 575 msec, and the mean for unpracticed
subjects was 799 msec, F(l, 18) = 10.1, p <
.01. The subject-group factor did not enter
into any significant interactions.
The ANOVA found no significant main effects for response type or display type, but
the two factors interacted significantly, F(2,
36) = 7.2, p<.0l. This interaction is observable in Table 5. In general, response
times were shortest for words and longest for
nonwords on positive trials, and the reverse
was true for negative trials. The negative
response data are unusual, since in Experiment 1 they showed the same trends as the
positive data, and the positive RT data are
similar in the two experiments. Perhaps the
more demanding search task in Experiment
2 resulted in a response compatibility problem, such that it was relatively more difficult
to execute a negative response to a set of
familiar words than to a set of unfamiliar
pseudowords and nonwords.

217

VISUAL SEARCH AND READING

Table 6
Mean Response Times and Proportions of
Errors (in Parentheses) for Each Display
Length Condition in Experiment 2
Number of display letters
Trial
Positive

712
(.12)

718
(.13)

756
(.16)

760
(.14)

Negative

696
(.08)

715
(.10)

748
(.12)

801
(.17)

Note. Response times are given in milliseconds.

Further significant effects in the RT AN^
OVA indicated that, somewhat paradoxically,
RT increased with exposure duration, F(2,
36) = 7.0, p < .01, and this increase was
greater for negative responses than for positive responses, F(2, 36) = 6.0, p < .01 (see
Table 5). Response times were found to increase significantly with display length, F(3,
54) = 15.4, p < .001, and this increase was
also greater for negative responses than for
positive responses, F(3, 54) = 3.8, p < .05.
The RT data for positive and negative responses for the various display lengths are
given in Table 6. These data are also somewhat unusual, since in Experiment 1 positive
and negative response times increased at the
same rate with increasing string length, indicating an exhaustive search process. It is
possible that in the longer and more difficult
search task Experiment 2, there was a
greater tendency to terminate the search
with location of the target letter.
Because of the greater difficulty of the
search task in Experiment 2 than in the first
study, and the resultant higher error rate,
the RT data in the second study are relatively less informative and the error data are
of greater interest. These are shown in Tables 5 and 6, but for purposes of clarity in
discussing the effects of display type, display
length, and exposure duration we decided to
convert the error data to d's before further
analysis. This was done by considering correct responses on positive trials as hits and
incorrect responses on negative trials as false
alarms. Figure 2 presents mean d's for the
various display-length and exposure-duration conditions. An analysis of these data,

with subject group as an additional factor,
found d's to increase significantly with duration, F(2,36) = 90.2, p< .001. In addition,
the Display Length X Duration interaction
was marginally significant, F(6, 108) = 2.2,
p < .05, indicating that sensitivity of detecting the presence or absence of the target letter was independent of display length for the
100-msec exposures (one-way F<1), but
sensitivity decreased with display length for
the longer durations, F(3, 54) = 10.0 and
9.0 for 200- and 300-msec exposures, respectively, bothps < .001. Finally, although
the practiced subjects had significantly larger
mean d's than the unpracticed subjects—
about 3.2 and 2.4, respectively, F(l, 18) =
18.4, p < .001—the subject-group factor did
not enter into any significant interactions.
A second analysis was made of the Display
Type X Exposure Duration data presented
in Figure 3. Again, the significant effect of
subject group is not shown, since it did not
interact with either factor. Both duration,
F(2, 36) = 86.6, p < .001, and display type,
F(2, 36) = 7.4, p < .01, main effects were
significant, and they did not interact, F(4,

3.5

9

3-1

>
300 MSEC

Z

2.3

200 MSEC

i1,9
100 MSEC

1.6
J

3

4

I

5

I

6

NUMBER OF DISPLAY LETTERS

Figure 2. Mean target letter detection sensitivity (expressed as d'} as a function of the number of letters in
each item of the five-item set in Experiment 2. (The
data are combined for words, pseudowords, and nonwords.)

218

J. F. JUOLA, N. J. WARD, AND T. McNAMARA

3.5

- 2.7

5

z

2.3

1.6
100

200

300

EXPOSURE DURATION PER ITEM I M S E C '

Figure 3. Mean target letter detection sensitivity (expressed as d') as a function of exposure duration per
item in the five-item set in Experiment 2. (The data are
combined across number of letters per display item and
are presented separately for words [W], pseudowords
[PW], and nonwords [NW].)

The results replicated those of Experiment
1 in showing perceptual differences among
words, regular pseudowords, and irregular
nonwords. The word-superiority effect was
maintained in the letter-search task using
RSVPs equivalent to rates of from 200 to
600 WPM. The present data also replicate
a recent finding reported by Krueger and
Shapiro (1979). They used uppercase six-letter words and irregular nonwords in a similar
visual search task, presenting nine successive
displays per trial. As in our Experiment 2,
they found a 4% difference between accuracy
levels for words and nonwords over a similar
range of exposure durations.
Since normal perceptual processes are apparently only limited, and not disrupted, by
RSVPs, these results encourage further exploration of the RSVP technique both as a
tool to gain understanding of the reading
process and as a technique to present text
rapidly to a reader using a computer.
Experiment 3

72) = 1.5, p > .05, Thus, the differences in
detection sensitivities among words, pseudowords, and nonwords were maintained
across all three duration conditions.
Discussion
The results of Experiment 2 generally replicated those of Experiment 1, despite some
anomalies in the RT data in the second
study. Specifically, unlike the majority of
data from visual search tasks involving single-string displays (including Experiment 1),
the RSVPs of five strings in Experiment 2
resulted in word-superiority effects in the
positive data only; negative responses were
actually slowest for words. Also, mean RTs
increased faster with display length for negative responses than for positive responses,
a result not typically found in visual search
(but see McNamara et al., 1978). The average error rate of about 12% necessitates
some qualification of the RT data, since RTs
can be unreliable in difficult tasks that result
in guesses on many trials. The error data and
d' analysis in Experiment 2 provide greater
justification for generalizing the results from
single-item search tasks to the RSVP task.

In normal reading, textual information is
integrated over several fixations into a general, coherent representation. Successive eye
fixations tend to follow the linear order of
the text, and it is expected that RSVP text
should not only be read and understood better, but actually perceived more accurately
if it is presented in the correct serial order
rather than in some rearranged order. The
third experiment tested this general hypothesis and made use of presentation conditions
that more closely approximated the visual
experience of reading than did those of Experiments 1 and 2. Instead of manipulating
redundancy within items, between-item redundancy was manipulated by presenting
series of words that were either simple sentences or scrambled versions of those sentences. Forster (1970) has shown that subjects can recall words more accurately if
intact rather than scrambled sentences are
presented at higher rates. His RSVP conditions were equivalent to a presentation rate
of 960 WPM, although an average of only
about half the words in a six-word sequence
could be reported. Sentence recall, of course,
involves memory and reconstruction of the
original words in order; either process could

VISUAL SEARCH AND READING

219

be facilitated by having to deal with mean- name with no exemplar in the sentence. These targets
ingful, structured text rather than unrelated were used for positive and negative trials, and care was
to ensure that the position of the target item on
words. However, there are many reasons to taken
positive trials was not changed when the sentences were
believe that the meaningfulness and struc- scrambled. (Scrambling was done by reversing word
ture of text also aid in initial encoding and order in the sentence except for the target item and then
assimilation of meaning from the perceived rearranging any additional words to eliminate relevant
or spurious meaningful interpretations). The locations
words.
of targets across sentences were balanced in that one
The effects of meaningful context on the third of them occurred in each three-word segment of
recognition of individual words presented the sentences. Thus, there was a total of 960 different
under impoverished or noisy stimulus con- word-string-target-item combinations. These were diinto eight balanced blocks of 120 trials.
ditions have been demonstrated in both vided
The apparatus was" the same as that used in Experspeech perception (e.g., Miller, Heise, & iments 1 and 2. The .masking field was enlarged to 13
Lichten, 1951) and visual recognition (e.g., characters to extend one space to the left and one space
Tulving & Gold, 1963). It has also been to the right of the longest word used.
Procedure. All subjects were run for a 1-hr, session
shown that children and adults can search
each of two days. Each session began with instrucmeaningful texts more rapidly for specific on
tions and 16 practice trials using materials similar to
words and for exemplars of semantic cate- the experimental stimuli. Four of the trial blocks were
gories than for meaningless subunits of then presented in the first session, with the remaining
words such as letters or syllables (Friedrich, four presented in the second session. Order of presentation of the four blocks was counterbalanced across
Schadler, & Juola, 1979; Juola, McDermott, subjects.
& Miller, Note 1). In addition, search rates
On each trial the target letter or category name was
for targets of all types are slowed by about shown centered on the display for 1.0 sec followed by
10% when scrambled versions of paragraphs the mask presented for .5 sec in the same place. The
are substituted for normal text X Juola et al., intact or scrambled sentence was then presented one
at a time, with the leftmost letter of each word
Note 1; see also Ball, Wood, & Smith, word
indented one space from the left edge of the mask. Pre1975).
sentation rates of SO and 100 msec per word were used,
In Experiment 3 we again used a search the latter being equivalent to the fastest RSVP condition
task involving single targets, with normal in Experiment 2. Immediately after the last word, the
reappeared and remained on for 1.2S sec after the
sentences or scrambled versions of those sen- mask
response until the next target appeared. If an error was
tences presented in RSVP conditions. The made, the word ERROR was presented for 1.5 sec foltargets were either single letters or any one lowed by the mask for 1.25 sec before the next target.
of many possible exemplars of a given se- As before, the assignment of positive and negative target
mantic category. The present study provides detection responses to the left- and right-hand switches
additional comparisons of results we have was counterbalanced across subjects.
obtained using intact and scrambled text
viewed normally versus similar materials Results
presented under RSVP conditions on a CRT
The overall percentage of correct redisplay.
sponses for the unpraeticed group was 88%,
and for the practiced group it was 89%. In
Method
all other ways, the data for the two groups
Subjects. Eight native English-speaking undergraduates participated for research credit in an introductory were very similar. This level of performance
psychology class at the University of Kansas. The four was slightly higher than that obtained in
practiced subjects from the first two studies also par- Experiment 2, although the presentation
ticipated.
rates were equivalent to 1,200 and 600
Stimuli and apparatus. The stimuli included 120 WPM in Experiment 3 versus between 600
different simple nine-word sentences and scrambled
rearrangements of these sentences. The sentences had and 200 WPM in Experiment 2. Obviously
been used in an earlier study by Friedrich et al. (1979) some of the differences in Experiment 3 conand were at about the second-grade level in readability. tributed to this relatively high level of perEach sentence was paired with four targets: (a) a letter formance, including the search for semantic
that occurred once in the sentence, (b) a letter that did
not occur in the sentence, (c) a category name, such as information as well as single letters and the
FOOD or CLOTHING, that had one exemplar (but not the use of sentences as well as lists of unrelated
category name itself) in the sentence, and (d) a category words. However, performance was about

220

J. F. JUOLA, N. J. WARD, AND T. McNAMARA

Table 7
Mean Proportions of Errors in Letter- and
Category-Search Conditions at Presentation
Rates of 50 and 100 Msec per Word in
Experiment 3
Category
search

Letter search
Sentence
type

50

100

than scrambled sentences, F(l, 10) = 10.0,
p < .01, and the slower presentation rate resulted in better performance than the faster
rate, F(l, 10) = 58.2, p < .001. None of the
interactions approached significance.'

50

100

.13
.15

.05
.06

.08
.11

.04
.04

False alarms
Intact
Scrambled

.22
.24

.09
.12

Misses
Intact
Scrambled

.14
.IT

.09
.10

67% more accurate in Experiment 3 for both
practiced and unpracticed subjects for comparable conditions—that is, in letter search
for 100-msec displays of scrambled sentences on Day 1 of Experiment 3 versus letter search for 100-msec displays of unrelated
words in Experiment 2. The mean word
length in Experiment 3 was about 4 letters
per word, as opposed to 4.5 in Experiment
2, and the short function words in the scrambled sentences never contained the target
letter or matched the target category. These
facts could have been used by the subjects
to improve performance in Experiment 3
over that obtained for the uniform-length
word displays of Experiment 2.
As in Experiment 2, the error data were
converted to d's prior to analysis (Table 7
presents the error data on which the d's were
based). A four-way ANOVA of the d' data,
involving the factors of target type (letter vs.
category), sentence type (intact vs. scrambled), presentation rate (50 msec per word
vs. 100 msec per word), and subject group
(practiced vs. unpracticed) found all factors
to produce significant main effects except
for subject group. The data were thus collapsed across groups and are presented in
Figure 4.
Detection of the presence or absence of
categorical information was more accurate
than detection of the presence or absence of
letter targets, F(l, 10) = 19.1, p < .001. Intact sentences resulted in better performance

Discussion
There are several unusual aspects of the
data that deserve comment. First is the high
level of performance, averaging about 84%
correct at a presentation rate of 1,200 WPM
and about 92% at 600 WPM; These presentation rates are about four times and two
times as fast, respectively, as typical collegestudent reading rates. Second, categorysearch performance averaged about 8% better than letter-search performance, despite
the fact that subjects knew exactly what to
look for in the letter-search condition, but
any of several words could appear in the category-search condition (in fact, 12 different
target words were used for each of the 10
category names). Finally, despite the small
differences in favor of the practiced subjects
in Experiment 3, the group performance differences were not significant as in the first
two studies.
The first result is encouraging, since high
levels of performance in the RSVP search
task indicate that the technique should be

LETTER

SEARCH

_

C A T E G O R Y SEARCH

INTACT

S 2.1

BO
EXPOSURE

DURATION

PER

WORD iMSEC)

Figure 4. Mean target letter detection sensitivity (expressed as d'} for letter targets (left panel) and for category targets (right panel) as a function of exposure
duration per word in the nine-word sequences in Experiment 3.

VISUAL SEARCH AND READING

a useful way to present text rapidly in a
study of reading for comprehension. The result that category information is detected
more easily than letter information has been
reported before (Friedrich et al., 1979), Although reading has sometimes been characterized as "a search for meaning" (Haber
& Hershenson, 1973, p. 205), the advantage
of category search over letter search might
not be due to a priority to conscious processes of meaning over perceptual information. In the letter-search condition there was
only a single item containing the evidence
necessary for a positive decision. In the category-search task, however, often several
words in both the intact- and scrambled-sentence conditions contained information relr
evant to the target category. For example,
consider the target category FOOD and the
sentence, "All the honey in the jar has been
eaten." Although honey is defined as the
matching word, other words relate to the
target category in a way that could facilitate
semantic detection. Of course it is just this
sort of linguistic (redundancy that enables
efficient reading for comprehension. The importance of syntax is also underscored in the
results by the advantage that normal, intact
sentences show over scrambled sentences in
both letter and category search.
Experiment 4
The first three studies demonstrated that
the perceptual characteristics of letters and
words displayed on the CRT screen were
conducive to highly accurate and rapid recognition responses. This was true both for
single displays and for sequences of up to
nine words presented at rates equivalent to
a maximum of 1,200 WPM. Further, both
within-string orthographic redundancy and
between-string linguistic redundancy facilitated visual search performance in the RSVP
task. Efficient reading for comprehension
presumably depends on similar use of orthographic and linguistic redundancy in obtaining meaning from print (e.g., Gibson &
Levin, 1975; Smith, 1978). Thus, we expect
subjects to make use of redundant sources
of information in reading RSVP text much
as they do in normal reading. The final experiment reported here tested the readability

221

of text presented in the RSVP format. All
subjects read a series of short paragraphs,
some displayed in their entirety on the CRT
screen (page condition) and some presented
via the RSVP mode (window condition).
Each paragraph was followed immediately
by a set of comprehension questions. We
used a variety of RSVP conditions in order
to test several different combinations of window size and window duration. These conditions spanned a wide range of reading
rates; reading comprehension scores were
compared over these rates for window and
page conditions in which total reading time
had been equated.
Method
Subjects. Forty-eight native English-speaking undergraduates participated for research credit in an introductory psychology class at the University of Kansas.
The practiced subjects from the previous experiments
were not used, primarily because of their familiarity
with the paragraphs and comprehension questions selected and used in the study.
Stimuli, Twelve short paragraphs (mean length =
199 words) from the Nelson-Denny Reading Test
Forms C and D (Nelson & Denny, 1976) and 12 additional paragraphs (mean length =168 words) selected
from the McCall-Crabbs Standard Test Lessons in
Reading (McCall & Crabbs, 1961) were used as experimental stimuli. Each of the Nelson-Denny paragraphs had four 5-alternative multiple-choice questions,
and each of the McCall-Crabbs paragraphs had more
than four 4-alternative, multiple-choice questions provided in the test manuals. For consistency in the present
study, each paragraph was followed by four 4-alternative multiple-choice questions selected from the materials provided. In three of these questions the answers
were altered slightly so that the correct response alternative could not be easily identified without first reading
the paragraph. A subsequent analysis of the 96 comprehension questions showed that 56 of them tested
memory for specific details in the paragraphs, and the
rest tested memory for more general information and
logical inferences.
The choice of stimulus materials was motivated by
a desire to span a range of reading difficulty. Thus, the
McCall-Crabbs paragraphs were chosen to represent
a relatively easy level and the Nelson-Denny paragraphs
represented a more difficult level of text. An application
of the Dale-Chall Readability Formula (Dale & Chall,
1948) to each paragraph resulted in an assignment of
the 7th-8th grade level to eight of the McCall-Crabbs
paragraphs, with three slightly below and one slightly
above this level. Similarly, six of the Nelson-Denny
paragraphs were rated at the 9th-10th grade level, with
two slightly below and four slightly above this level. The
McCall-Crabbs paragraphs will therefore be referred
to as the intermediate set and the Nelson-Denny para-

222

J. F. JUOLA, N. J. WARD, AND T. McNAMARA

graphs as the secondary set for the remainder of this
article.
Apparatus and display. The computer-driven CRT
terminal was the same as that used in Experiments 13. Two different modes of text presentation were used
for the paragraphs. In the page condition, each paragraph was presented in its entirety and appeared on the
CRT screen in a normal format of no more than 65
characters per line and about 14-20 lines.1 The page
condition was used as a control to approximate conventional paragraph reading conditions, as opposed- to
RSVP reading in the window condition. In the window
condition, text was serially presented as successive
chunks, with each chunk containing one or more words.
Since the average word length in the materials used was
about S letters, the smallest window that could be used
while consistently presenting at least one word at a time
was S character spaces. In addition, two other window
conditions were used in which an average of either 10
or 1S characters and spaces were presented at once. The
final manipulation in the window condition was duration; successive windows were presented for either 200
msec or 300 msec each. The conditions were chosen
specifically to include the range of visual information
sampled during a typical eye fixation in reading.
The CRT-controller program presented successive
chunks of text with window sizes averaging 5, 10, or 15
characters and spaces (i.e., about one, two, or three
words at a time, on the average). It is important to
emphasize that these are average window sizes, since
it was decided not to truncate any words within a window. Thus the program in the 10-character window size
condition, for example, scanned the upcoming text for
10-space segments and entered this segment into the
display buffer only if the llth character was a space,
If the 10th character occurred in the middle of a word,
the program scanned forward and backward through
the text to find the nearest space, and then presented
the segment of text up to that space on the CRT. Another modification of the program emphasized sentence
boundaries within paragraphs by presenting a blank
window between sentences. These modifications of the
program resulted in different (generally slower) presentation rates than what might be expected if WPM rates
were actually calculated (e.g., 15 characters and spaces
every 200 msec = about 900 WPM). The actual presentation rates obtained are reported in the Results section. The paragraphs in the page condition were shown
for three different total exposure times to span the same
range of reading rates experienced in the window condition.
Procedure. The window condition included 12 different trial types (intermediate vs. secondary paragraphs; 5, 10, or 15 spaces per window; and window
durations of either 200 msec or 300 msec each). There
were six trial types in the page condition, corresponding
to intermediate versus secondary paragraphs and three
total presentation times roughly equivalent to the times
necessary for slow normal reading, fast normal reading,
and very fast reading. All 24 paragraphs were used twice
in each window condition and four times in each page
condition across the 48 subjects. For half of the subjects
the page condition was presented first, and the window
condition was presented first for the other half.

Each session began with three practice paragraphs
presented in the mode appropriate to the initial presentation condition for that subject. The conditions were
explained,'and the practice paragraphs were shown in
either the page or window condition. In the page condition, the instructions "Read Normally," "Read Rapidly," or "Read Very Rapidly" were shown in the upper
left corner of the screen for .5 sec followed by a full
page of overlapped Xs and Os for .5 sec. This mask was
then followed by the onset of the entire paragraph for
a varying amount of time corresponding to the readingrate cues. The paragraph was followed immediately by
the full-page mask for .5 sec, after which the first of the
four comprehension questions appeared. The subjects
were instructed to type one of the letters a, b, c, or d
on the terminal keyboard to select one of the answers
given for each comprehension question.
The block of window trials was also preceded by three
practice paragraphs selected to represent the range of
presentation conditions used. Unlike in the page condition, however, no preceding cues were used to indicate
the window sizes or durations. Each trial began with a
.5 sec presentation of a 25-character mask of overlapped
Xs and Os presented in the center of the screen. This
mask was then replaced with the first window, in which
the initial letter was indented one space from the lefthand side of the mask. The last window was followed
immediately by the mask for .5 sec and then the first
comprehension question. The subjects were allowed unlimited time for answering each question and were given
feedback after incorrect responses only by the presentation of the word ERROR. For each subject all 24 paragraphs and comprehension questions in both conditions
were completed in a single 1-hr, session.

Results
Tables 8 and 9 present the mean reading
rates and comprehension performance for
the page and window conditions, respectively. The reading rates in the page condition were calculated from the number of
words in each paragraph and the total time
that the paragraph was displayed in each of
the three duration conditions. The three durations were determined separately for each
paragraph to keep the total amount of reading time per word within the same range for
the page and window conditions.
1
None of the displays presented on the Teleray terminal appeared instantaneously; rather they were serially written and displayed at a rate of about .83 msec
per character. This serial writing process was not noticeable for the smaller displays, but it was for the paragraphs. The longest paragraphs used required almost
a full second to display from the first character in the
first sentence until the final character in the last word.
However, this rate was so much faster than the maximum reading rate required that it was not thought to
limit readability in any way.

VISUAL SEARCH AND READING

Table 8
Mean Reading Rates and Proportions of
Correct Choices on Comprehension Questions
for the Page Condition in Experiment 4
Reading rate instruction
Paragraph
difficulty

Normal

Secondary
Reading rate
% correct

214

328

705

.581

.526

.435

Intermediate
Reading rate
% correct

216

330

705

,797

.721

'.471

Rapid

Very rapid

Note. Reading rates are given in words per minute.

223

That is, performance in the normal-rate page
condition was compared with that in the 300
msec 5-character (300/5) window condition,
the rapid page condition was compared with
the mean of the 300/10 and 200/5 window
conditions, and the very rapid page condition
was compared with the 200/15 window condition. The slight advantages for the window
conditions in the first and third comparisons
for intermediate paragraphs were not significant (both ts < 1.0), but the 5% comprehension advantage for the rapid page condition was significantly greater than that for
the mean of the two corresponding window
conditions, *(47) = -2.14, p < .05. Similar
t tests for the secondary paragraphs found
no significant differences in comprehension
between page and window conditions.
A final analysis of the comprehension data
was made for questions about specific details
versus those asking for more general information. A three-way ANOVA using the factors of paragraph difficulty, presentation format, and question type found only the
difficulty factor to be significant, F(l, 84) =
22.9, p < .001. The mean score of 59% correct for the specific questions did not significantly exceed the 55% correct score for the

The comprehension performance data were
analyzed by linear regression methods to test
for the effects of presentation rate, paragraph difficulty, and for any differences between performance in the page and window
conditions. The regression analyses treated
percentage of correct responses on the comprehension questions for each paragraph in
all conditions as functions of the reading
rate. Separate functions were found for the
intermediate and secondary paragraphs in
both the window and page conditions. The
differences between the regression slopes and
intercepts found in the two presentation con- Table 9
ditions were evaluated using a jack-knife Mean Reading Rates and Proportions of
procedure (Hosteller & Tukey, 1977). For Correct Choices on Comprehension Questions
the secondary paragraphs, the slope differ- for the Window Condition in Experiment 4
ences between window and page conditions
Window size (spaces)
were found not to differ significantly from
Window
zero (mean slope difference for windowduration
5
10
15
page conditions = .002 ± .024, the 95% conSecondary paragraphs
fidence interval). Similarly, the mean difference between the window and page inter- 200
321
524
705
Reading rate
cepts also did not differ significantly from
.552
.474
.422
% correct
zero (mean intercept difference = —.4 ±
11.8). For the intermediate paragraphs, no 300
Reading rate
214
350
470
window-page differences were found for the
%' correct
.531
.547
.484
slopes (mean slope difference = -.001 ±
Intermediate paragraphs
.022), and the intercept was not significantly
greater in the page condition than in the 200
705
Reading rate
323
511
window condition (mean intercept differ% correct
.698
.510
.505
ence = -5.5 ±8,0).
To further test for any possible perfor- 300
Reading rate
215
341
470
mance differences in the page and window
% correct
.807
.647
.484
conditions, t tests were performed on the
comprehension data for those reading rates Note. Reading rates are given in words per minute;
that were equivalent in the two conditions. window durations are given in milliseconds.

224

J. F. JUOLA, N. J. WARD, AND T. McNAMARA

PAGE

CONDITION

i

»

WINDOW CONDITION
200

MSEC

0—0

300

MSEC

»--«

.70

£

i

.60

u

Z

.50

200

300

400

SOO

600

700

READING DATE (WORDS PER MINUTE)

Figure 5. Mean proportion correct on the comprehension questions for paragraphs presented for various
lengths of time (converted to words per minute) in Experiment 4. (The connected data points are, from left
to right, for the normal, rapid, and very rapid readingrate instructions in the page condition and for windows
of 5, 10, and 15 character spaces in the window condition.)

more general questions, F( 1, 84) = 1.36, p>
.05, nor did performance differ for window
and page conditions, F(l, 84) = 1.14. None
of the interactions was significant. The general lack of significant differences in comprehension performance between the page
and window conditions, as well as the effects
of presentation rate, are further illustrated
in Figure 5. In this figure, the data for the
intermediate and secondary paragraphs presented in Tables 8 and 9 have been combined. The data show comprehension performance in the window condition to be at
or only slightly below that obtained in the
page condition across the range of reading
rates used (200-700 WPM). Further, the
differences in comprehension appear to be
less for the more rapid sequence of windows
(200 msec each) than in the slower, 300msec window condition when overall rates
of presentation are equated.
Discussion
The results demonstrated that reading
short paragraphs for comprehension can be
efficiently done via the RSVP mode on a
CRT screen. With only one exception there
were no significant differences in compre-

hension scores between the successive window conditions and the complete page condition over the range of materials and
presentation rates used in Experiment 4.
Thus, even though the subjects had had
many years experience reading paragraphs
presented as wholistic entities to be scanned
with normal eye movements, their comprehension as measured by the test questions
was no better than that obtained in the
uniquely different RSVP mode of presentation. This was true for materials from the
sixth-grade level to college levels and for
slower than normal reading rates to rates of
about twice the normal college-student reading rate.
These results support the conjectures of
Bouma and de Voogd (1974) and Potter et
al. (1980) that text can be presented one or
more words at a time to a single visual locus
without necessarily disrupting normal reading comprehension processes. (In fact, Potter
et al. report some evidence for superior reading performance in the RSVP condition over
that obtained for normal reading. This result
was obtained mainly in conditions in which
subjects were unable to read the entire paragraph as a whole in the allotted time.) Thus,
there is apparently only a minor contribution
to comprehension from the highly variable
and somewhat erratic pattern of eye movements and fixation durations in normal reading. These data support the notion that most
of reading comprehension depends instead
on conceptually driven processes that operate normally over a wide ra^ge of variable
input formats. The data also suggest that
there is a limit to what can be inferred about
reading comprehension processes from an
analysis of eye-movement patterns alone
(but see Just & Carpenter, 1980). Finally,
the results of Experiment 4 encourage the
extension of the RSVP technique not only
to the study of normal reading for comprehension behavior but also to examination of
reading speeds and comprehension abilities
beyond any limits imposed by the mechanical movements of the eye.
General Discussion
Presenting text under computer control
allows for testing reading -comprehension

VISUAL SEARCH AND READING

over a wide range of possible input formats.
The research reported here represents an initial stage in the study of text presentation
methods that allow some degree of comprehension at rates equivalent to or faster than
normal reading using standard page formats.
Because of the relatively novel methods of
text presentation employed, we felt it was
necessary to test legibility and other perceptual factors involved in viewing single letter
strings and RSVPs of string sequences before extending the method to studies of actual reading. Thus the issues successively
investigated and discussed here include (a)
the perceptibility of letters presented as
light-against-dark dot patterns on a CRT
screen, (b) the relative perceptibilities of
words and unfamiliar strings made up of
such characters, (c) the perceptual effects
of orthographic and linguistic structure on
the perception of RSVP letter strings, and
(d) the relative readability of text presented
in normal paragraph format as opposed to
a variety of RSVP formats for the same total
viewing time.
The results indicated that both perceptual
processes and reading for comprehension are
only minimally disrupted by presenting letter strings and text on the CRT screen and
by eliminating the need for eye movements
through successive presentation of displays
to a single visual location. These results are
important in that they demonstrate the viability of reading text presented in formats
that are unusual yet ideally suited to the
visual display capabilities of computer terminals. Further, the results suggest the possibility that, with practiced readers, text presentation methods can be found that will
lead to improved reading speed and comprehension abilities over those obtainable
when text is viewed in a normal page format.
Also, RSVP techniques might be useful for
manipulating text processing on-line, leading to new methods of studying reading be*
havior.
The first two experiments demonstrated
that letters in words and other character
strings can be detected reliably and accurately using the dot-matrix letters of a typical CRT computer terminal. The results
were in all ways comparable to those obtained using similar materials presented as

225

high-quality, typed displays of black letters
on a white background (e.g., Juola et al.,
1978). Experiment 2 further demonstrated
that RSVP sequences of five letter strings
also resulted in reliable letter-detection performance even when the rate of presentation
was increased to the equivalent of 600
WPM. Both studies also found small but
reliable advantages in letter-recognition performance for word displays over orthographically regular pseudowords and for pseudowords over irregular nonwords. These results
indicate that orthographic regularity plays
a role in the visual perception of letter
strings, perhaps by facilitating inferential
processes or eliminating some alternatives
for letters before they are identified. The
word-superiority effect itself undoubtedly
owes a large part of its existence to the use
of orthographic redundancy in the recognition process. However, the consistent advantage for common words over regular pseudowords observed in Experiments 1 and 2
and in many other studies points to some
special property of words that is not captured
in,manipulations of orthographic regularity
in nonword letter strings. Admittedly, word
recognition might be based on single-letter
recognition processes plus the use of redundant orthographic information, and the word
advantage often reported might then be due
to the fact that the orthographic regularity
of words is not adequately represented in the
pseudowords despite the best intentions of
careful researchers. On the other hand, that
words are composed of letters does not mean
letter identification must precede word recognition any more than separate perception
of leaves, branches, trunk, and bark must
precede recognition of a tree. The main point
is that the similarity of results from tachistoscopic studies and those obtained here using a CRT and RSVPs indicates that the
perceptual processes involved in word recognition are not unduly affected by the use
of these rather unusual computer displays.
Beyond word-recognition issues in the
study of reading lie considerations of how
readers use semantic and syntactic information and other relevant knowledge to construct meaningful interpretations of text
built up across several successive eye fixations. Experiment 3 demonstrated that even

226

J. F. JUOLA, N. J. WARD, AND T. McNAMARA

in searches for a single letter or an example
of a given semantic category, the structure
of sentences is important, because performance was better for intact than scrambled
sentences. Linguistic redundancy was useful
even at RSVP rates equivalent to 1,200
WPM. It was also of interest to find that in
all combinations of degree of structure and
rate of presentation, search for meaning was
superior to performance in the letter-search
task.
The final study reported here demonstrated that short paragraphs can be read
about as well for immediate comprehension
tests in the RSVP mode as in a standard
page format. This was true for a variety of
RSVP conditions, including successive windows of 200 msec or 300 msec each, with
window sizes spanning 5 to 15 characters
and spaces. The materials ranged widely in
difficulty, and the overall presentation times
corresponded to reading rates ranging from
about 200 to 700 WPM, yet the results were
consistent: Comprehension performance as
measured by the test questions was not reliably better with the standard page format
than in the novel RSVP mode. The data also
suggested that some RSVP conditions might
be better than others at a given processing
rate. That is, small windows presented at 200
msec each might be more easily read than
larger windows at 300-msec durations, although definitive resolution of the question
of how best to choose window parameters
awaits additional research. It will also be
desirable in future research to include rigorous tests of comprehension to insure that
null results are not merely due to insensitivity of the comprehension measure. Our measure showed strong effects of paragraph difficulty and presentation rate, but possible
reading differences among various RSVP
conditions and between window and page
conditions deserve closer consideration in
future research.
The results of Experiment 4 are encouraging in that they suggest that the active
eye-movement patterns of a skilled reader
are not necessarily the optimal way to sample information from text. The present RSVP
methods of text presentation made no
concession to linguistic structure other than
displaying entire words without truncations

and inserting a blank window between sentences. It is possible that more sophisticated
parsing programs that include text structure
variables in the selection of window contents
could result in improvement in the readability of RSVP text. Further, the present
subjects had less than 30 minutes of experience in the RSVP reading task, as opposed
to thousands of hours of experience with
normal text formats. It is: uncertain what
levels of immediate comprehension and longterm retention might be obtainable using
more sophisticated text presentation programs and experienced readers who, perhaps, could interact with the computer to
select and modify text presentation parameters. New manipulations of text presentation modes using computer-controlled displays might well result in higher levels of
information transmission between the data
source and reader than are presently possible
with static pages and dynamic eye movements determining the information flow.
Reference Note
1. Juola, J. F., McDermott, D. A., & Miller, T. J. Visual search and reading. Paper presented at the annual convention of the Psychonomic Society, Washington, D.C., 1977.

References
Aaronson, D,, & Scarborough, H. S. Performance theories of sentence coding: Some quantitative models.
Journal of Verbal Learning arid Verbal Behavior,
1977, 16, 277-303.
Ball, F., Wood, C., & Smith, E. E.; When are semantic
targets detected faster than visual or acoustic ones?
Perception & Psychophysics, 1975, 17, 1-8.
Baron, J., & Thurston, I. An analysis of the word superiority effect. Cognitive Psychology, 1973, 4. 207228.
Bouma, H., & de Voogd, A. H. On the control of eye
saccades in reading. Vision Research, 1974,14, 273284.
Bruder, G. A. The role of visual familiarity in the wordsuperiority effects obtained with the simultaneousmatching task. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 1978, 4, 88100.
Dale, E., & Chall, J. S. A formula for predicting readability. Educational Research Bulletin (Ohio State
University), 1948, 27, 11-20; 37-54.
Forster, K. I. Visual perception of rapidly presented
word sequences of varying complexity. Perception
& Psychophysics, 1970, 8, 215-221.
Friedrich, F. J., Schadler, M., & Juola, J. F. Developmental changes in units of processing in reading.

VISUAL SEARCH AND READING
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 1979,28,
344-358.
Gibson, E, J., & Levin, H. The psychology of reading.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1975.
Gilford, R. M., & Juola, J. F. Familiarity effects on
memory search and visual search. Bulletin of the
Psychonomic Society. 1976, 7, 142-144.
Haber, R. Control of eye movements during reading.
In R. A. Monty & J. W. Senders (Eds.), Eye movements and psychological processes. Hillsdale, N.J.:
Erlbaum, 1976.
Haber, R. N., & Hershenson, M. The psychology of
visual perception. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and
Winston, 1973.
Henderson, L. Is there a lexicality component in the
word superiority effect? Perception & Psychophyslcs,
1980, 28, 179-184.
Huey, E. D. The psychology and pedagogy of reading.
Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T. Press, 1968. (Originally
published, 1908.)
Juola, J. F., Leavitt, D. D., & Choe, C. S. Letter identification in word, nonword, and single-letter displays.
Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 1974, 4, 278280.
Juola, J. F., Schadler, M., Chabot, R. J., & McCaughey, M. W. The development of visual information processing skills related to reading. Journal
of Experimental Child Psychology, 1978, 25, 459476.
Just, M. A., & Carpenter, P. A. A theory of reading:
From eye fixations to comprehension. Psychological
Review, 1980, 87, 329-354.
Krueger, L. E, Visual comparison in a redundant display. Cognitive Psychology, 1970, /, 341-357.
Krueger, L. E., & Shapiro, R. G. Letter detection with
rapid serial visual presentation: Evidence against
word superiority at feature extraction. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 1979, 5, 657-673.
Kucera, H., & Francis, W. H. Computational analysis
of present-day American English. Providence: Brown
University Press, 1967.
Levy-Schoen, A., O'Regan, K. The control of eye movements in reading. In P. A. Kolers, M. E. Wrolstad,
& H. Bouma (Eds.), Processing of visible language.
New York: Plenum Press, 1979.
Massaro, D. W. Understanding language: An information processing analysis of speech perception,
reading, and psycholinguistics. New York: Academic
Press, 1975,
Massaro, D. W., Taylor, G. A,, Venezky, R. L., Jastrzembski, J. E., & Lucas, P. A. Letter and word
perception. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1980.
Massaro, D. W., Venezky, R, L., & Taylor, G. A. Orthographic regularity, positional frequency, and visual
processing of letter strings. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 1979, 108, 107-124.
.
Mayzner, M. S., & Tresselt, M. E. Tables of singleletter and digram frequency counts for various wordlength and letter-position combinations. Psychonomic
Monograph Supplements, 1965, 1, (2).

227

McCall, W. A., & Crabbs, L. M. Standard test lessons
in reading. New York: Teachers' College Press, 1961.
McCaughey, M. W., Juola, J. F., Schadler, M., &
Ward, N. Whole-word units are used before orthographic knowledge in perceptual development. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 1980, 30,
411-421.
McNamara, T., Ward, N., & Juola, J. F. Visual search
for letters in intact and mixed-case words and nonwords, Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 1978,
12, 297-300.
Miller, G. A., Heise, G. A., & Lichten, W. The intelligibility of speech as a function of the context of the
test materials. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
1951, 41, 329-335.
Mosteller, F., & Tukey, J. W. Data analysis and regression: A second course in statistics. Reading, Mass.:
Addison-Wesley, 1977.
Nelson, M. J., & Denny, E. C. The Nelson-Denny reading test. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin, 1976.
Potter, M. C., Kroll, J. F., & Harris, C. Comprehension
and memory in rapid sequential reading. In R. Nickerson (Ed.) Attention and performance VIII. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum, 1980.
Purcell, D. G., Stanovich, K. E., & Spector, A. Visual
angle and the word superiority effect. Memory &
Cognition, 1978, 6, 3-8.
Rayner, K., & McConkie, G. W, Perceptual processes
in reading: The perceptual spans. In A. S. Reber &
D. L. Scarborough (Eds.), Toward a psychology of
reading. Hillsdale, N.J.; Erlbaum, 1977.
Reicher, G. M. Perceptual recognition as a function of
meaningfulness of stimulus material. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1969, 81, 275-280.
Shebilske, W. Reading eye movements from an information-processing point of view. In D. W. Massaro
(Ed.), Understanding language. New York: Academic Press, 1975.
Smith, F. Understanding reading. New York: Holt,
Rinehart, and Winston, 1978.
Sternberg, S. High-speed scanning in human memory.
Science, 1966, 153, 652-654.
Sternberg, S. Memory scanning: Mental processes revealed by reaction experiments. American Scientist,
1969, .57, 421-457.
Taylor, G. A., Miller, T. J., Juola, J. F. Isolating visual
units in the perception of words and nonwords. Perception & Psychophysics, 1977, 21, 377-386,
Tulving, E., & Gold, C. Stimulus information and contextual information as determinants of tachistoscopic
recognition of words. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1963,66, 319-327.
Volkmann, F. C. Saccadic supression: A brief review.
In R. A. Monty & J. W. Senders (Eds.), Eye movements and psychological processes. Hillsdale, N.J.:
Erlbaum, 1976.

Received March 16, 1981 •

